Propagate quay.io credentials to target clusters (#68)
konflux-ci/architecture: ADR/propagate-pull-secrets.md

# 0. Support deploying images from Private Quay.io repositories

Date: 2023-03-16

## Status

Provisional

## Context

* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to generate a private Quay.io image repository if my source code repository is  private.

> * As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to gracefully deploy images that were pushed to private Quay.io repositories in every relevant environment.

Reviewer: The expectation is that all Environments configured in a workspace should be able to pull images for components even if those images are private repositories?

Author: > all Environments configured 

This should only be for relevant environments, ex, those with SnapShotEnvironmentBindings.

## Decision

### Overview

This proposal builds on the capabilties of the https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/image-controller which sets up a Quay.io image repository per `Component` and 'downloads' a robot account token into the user's namespace for builds to be able to push to it.

#### 1. Scenario: When a new Environment is defined

> 1. The image-controller copies the pull(actually, push)`Secret` from the user's namespace into the target cluster's namespace for every Component in the workspace/namespace.

Reviewer: How will Environments use the multitudes of pull secrets for each component?

2. The image-controller links the copied `secret` to the `deployer` `serviceAccount`. If the `deployer` `serviceAccount` is absent, the `Secret` 

>     would be linked to the `default` `serviceAccount` to account for distributions of Kubernetes which do not have a `deployer` `serviceAccount`.

Reviewer: Is it something that is needed to support BYO clusters?

3. At a heartbeat of 24 hours, the `Secret` in the target cluster's namespace is reconciled.

#### 2. Scenario: When a new Component is created

> 1. As part of the existing 'daily chores' of the image-controller, a new Quay.io image repository and robot account token is made available in the 

Reviewer: Can you define `daily chores`? Do they run on a cron or does this just describe the normal functionality of the image-controller?

   namespace for 
 builds to be able to push to.
2. The image-controller iterates over every Environment that's present on the workspace/namespace.
3. For each Environment, the image-controller creates/updates the relevant `Secret` in the target cluster's namespace and links it to the `deployer`
   (or `default` `sa`).

#### 3. Scenario: Recovering from a disaster / credentials' exposure

1. Request re-generation of the Quay.io robot account token by setting the annotation `image.redhat.com/generate: 'true'` on the relevant Components.
  The resulting Quay.io API call automatically revokes the old token.
2. Continue to *Scenario 2: When a new Component is created*

## Consequences

1. The reference to the `Secret` is not visible in the GitOps repo.

> 2. The 'disaster recovery' scenario would bank on requesting a re-creation of the image repository credentials, which would then be propagated to the relevant Environments.

Reviewer: What is the structure of the secret? After disaster recovery, is the secret mapped appropriately so that an update will occur instead of just an addition?

Author: Yes, the content of the `Secret` should change, the shape and name should be the same.

Reviewer: Is disaster recovery coming back from the deletion of everything or the case where credentials need to be cycled (i.e. if leaked)? If the latter, I don't see any cleanup happening so the number of secrets would just be increasing, some just less valid than others.

Author: When all the secrets are lost, we'd need to be able to re-pull them from Quay.io. What we'd do is regenerate the robot account token on quay.io and pull it into a secret.

Reviewer: Ack. This is considering all secrets being lost. So I wouldn't expect any names to change (and therefore any need to perform clean up first). Thanks.

3. This process doesn't yet use a secret storage mechanism like SPI / Vault and the tech debt needs to be factored into future plans for improvement.
4. The image-controller needs to have permissions to read the credentials associated with an `Environment`.

> 5. Since no new pull secrets are created ( we re-use the one created for the builds ), we are potentially planting a `Secret` which also has 'push' permissions even though the deployment of a `pod` only needs to be able to pull an image.

Reviewer: +1

# 0. Support deploying images from Private Quay.io repositories

Date: 2023-03-16

## Status

Provisional

## Context

* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to generate a private Quay.io image repository if my source code repository is  private.
* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to gracefully deploy images that were pushed to private Quay.io repositories in every relevant environment.

## Decision

### Overview

1. This proposal builds on the capabilties of the https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/image-controller which sets up a Quay.io image repository per `Component` and 'downloads' a robot account token into the user's namespace for builds to be able to push to it.

2. This proposal builds on the capabilities of SPI's `RemoteSecret` API. See https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/book/pull/70/files

#### When a new `Component` is created

> 1. A new Quay.io image repository and robot account token is made available in the namespace that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image.

Author: > and robot account token is made available in the namespace that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image

The image-controller would need to produce this - will be tracked.

> 1. A new Quay.io image repository and robot account token is made available in the namespace that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image.

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify which namespace here?

* The namespace that represents the user's appstudio control plane workspace?
* The namespace represented by the Environment's associated DeploymentTarget?

I think it is the first one - but want to double check. (Maybe update the language to be more specific?)

Author: The appstudio control plane namespace, yes (sure, I'll update)

> 1. A new Quay.io image repository and robot account token is made available in the namespace that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. image-controller creates a new Quay.io image repository
2. image-controller provisions a new robot account token that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image.
3. image-controller creates a `Secret` in the user's workspace namespace containing the robot account token
```

2. The image-controller labels the `Secret` with the name `Application`/`Component` the `Secret` is associated with. 

#### When an expression of intent to deploy an `Application` to an `Environment` is made.

1. Watch for creation of new `SnapshotEnvironmentBindings`.
2. Query the 'pull' `Secret` generated by the image-controller. 
3. Label the `Secret` with the name of the `Environment` ( ex, `spi.appstudio.redhat.com/target-environment: prod`) the `Secret` needs to be copied to, based on the `SnapshotEnvironmentBinding` CR.
3. SPI generates a `RemoteSecret` CR referencing the 'pull' `Secret` above. ( See https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/book/pull/70/files )
3. SPI reconciles the `RemoteSecret` CR, copies over the 'pull' `Secret` to the relevant cluster/namespace and links it to the `default` `serviceaccount`.

> TODO: Which Stonesoup controller should be doing (1), (2) and (3) 

Reviewer 2: My two cents: this should be application-service, since it is already watching for and reacting to changes in the SnapshotEnvironmentBindings in order to write out updates to the gitops repo.

cc @elsony

Reviewer 3: How often does the `Secret` changes? If we are only doing that immediately after the creation of `SnapshotEnvironmentBindings`, is there a reason why we don't include that information during the creation of the `SnapshotEnvironmentBindings` so we don't have extra logic to handle this?

Reviewer 2: @sbose78, wdyt? I think the Secret will "normally" only be provisioned once when the Component is created - although it is possible we'll want to delete it and have it be reprovisioned manually - or, someday introduce automated rotation.

Author: @elsony Yeah, that's do-able as well. My proposal mostly intended to address a separation of concerns but doing it along with creation of `SnapshotEnvironmentBindings` works as well.

@ralphbean , Yeah, the Secret shouldn't change a lot. I'm hoping if/when the contents of the `Secret` does change, SPI should take care of getting it sync'd.

# 0. Support deploying images from Private Quay.io repositories

Date: 2023-03-16

## Status

Provisional

## Context

* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to generate a private Quay.io image repository if my source code repository is  private.
* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to gracefully deploy images that were pushed to private Quay.io repositories in every relevant environment.

## Decision

### Overview

> 1. This proposal builds on the capabilties of the https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/image-controller which sets up a Quay.io image repository per `Component` and 'downloads' a robot account token into the user's namespace for builds to be able to push to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. This proposal builds on the capabilties of the [image-controller](https://redhat-appstudio.github.io/book/book/image-controller.html) which sets up a Quay.io image repository per `Component` and 'downloads' a robot account token into the user's namespace for builds to be able to push to it.
```

2. This proposal builds on the capabilities of SPI's `RemoteSecret` API. See https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/book/pull/70/files

#### When a new `Component` is created

1. image-controller creates a new Quay.io image repository

> 2. image-controller provisions a new robot account token that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image.

Reviewer 4: Not sure what does robot accout token provisioning mean. I thought it can be only generated on quay.io web page and copy-pasted...Or there is some more automated way? 
Anyway, we can leverage storing this secret data on secret storage using RemoteSecret on this stage by for example:
- create upload secret with the robot accout token and `Application`/`Component` annotations. 
- It's controller will upload token data to the storage and create RemoteSecret with corresponding `Application`/`Component` labels (upload secret will be immediately deleted).

Author: 👍

3. image-controller creates a `Secret` in the user's workspace namespace containing the robot account token
2. The image-controller labels the `Secret` with the name `Application`/`Component` the `Secret` is associated with. 

#### When an expression of intent to deploy an `Application` to an `Environment` is made.

1. Watch for creation of new `SnapshotEnvironmentBindings`.
2. Query the 'pull' `Secret` generated by the image-controller. 

> 3. Label the `Secret` with the name of the `Environment` ( ex, `spi.appstudio.redhat.com/target-environment: prod`) the `Secret` needs to be copied to, based on the `SnapshotEnvironmentBinding` CR.

Reviewer 5: If the secret would need to be copied to multiple environments, then I'm not sure how it would work with a single label on the Secret.

> 3. Label the `Secret` with the name of the `Environment` ( ex, `spi.appstudio.redhat.com/target-environment: prod`) the `Secret` needs to be copied to, based on the `SnapshotEnvironmentBinding` CR.

Author: My proposal had started with looking out for `SnapshotEnvironmentBinding` because that shows the intent to deploy - having a Component/Application doesn't quite show that intent :-)  Thoughts?
